because clearly you are concerned in your writing and in your comments about the relationship between the author and the reader.
And it's very clear...
concern here in this book.
I don't know if we could just open the conversation that way, but if you could just tell me a little bit about this concern for the reader here.
Well, first of all, I don't want...
I don't want the reader to get away too easily.
I think that reading and writing present a really unique opportunity that the other arts don't.
I envy the musician.
I envy the dancer, the physicality of the dancer, the immediacy of music.
And those are models that I try to imitate with the rhythm, speech rhythms, rhythm of the prose, the words.
But really, writing and reading has something unique about it.
It can't be duplicated by the other mediums, media.
And I think good writing is something that centers itself right in that special relationship between two minds.
And I like to push that edge and explore that edge in the writing I like best.
does center itself in the reading process.
And by that I mean good writing probably creates a space between the mind or the imagination of the reader and the mind and imagination of the writer.
And then the book, this thing, this art that writing produces enacts itself somewhere in the middle.
So there's this product which...
A good author does a lot of the work to create, but it's almost impossible without a good reader also in there in that same space.
That's how I visualize the whole thing.
I did an interview yesterday with Andre White, whose first book was banned in his home country, South Africa.
He said, this was the worst thing that could happen to a writer.
I was a writer without a reader.
Imagine that.
And then he writes today, and he said, he writes about South Africa or South Africa.
Yeah.
And yet 60% of the people in this country can't read him.
They are unable to read.
I'm wondering, you know, within all this, do you have a sense of your readership?
Who's he writing for, I think?
I mean, do you find influence...
Not the primary subjects of his writing, but at least she's published in 29 languages.
I'm not asking you to compare yourself anyway.
I just thought you'd call that out.
Have you decided yet, or do you need some more time?
Okay.
and we're winning.
Audience, kind of.
Yeah, everyone.
You really, there's really some discussion in this book about who the writer is writing for.
I mean, have you ever read a work in progress to your own father?
No, no.
I never have read a work in progress.
He's heard work in progress as part of an audience.
Yeah, what's said in there is pretty accurate about my own experience.
I never sat down one-on-one and read to him.
And that causes me a certain amount of unhappiness or sadness.
Yeah, but that's not... I think that's just not his personality.
It's not my personality.
I'm sorry maybe that it isn't,
But we communicated in other ways.
We communicated through sports and nonverbal stuff.
But that was certainly significant enough for you to be alert, not only to be alert to it, but to write it in this book.
Well, it just struck me one day.
It just struck me.
The same way it struck me one day that I never wrote a children's book while I had kids.
You know, the path not taken, the road not taken.
And these things, these moments are very touching and very poignant, but you can't change things, you can't go back.
It's striking, and you write about it, and maybe somebody else picks it up and maybe decides to read a story to their father.
I mean, my son has read...
Lots of stories to me that he's written right in.
My son's a big fellow.
He's 28.
He's already edited an anthology, so he has a book in print.
It's called Soul Fires.
It's one word.
It's published by Viking.
Wait a minute, is that right?
Yes.
Daniel, and he's one of the editors, along with Rohan Preston.
And it's a book of writing of young black men on the themes of love and violence.
What's unique about it is it's not just writers per se, but it's guys who are actors, guys who have been in prison, guys who are regular working stiffs, all under 30, all talking about these two themes.
So it's an anthology that's got a lot of attention, a lot of response.
He's learned a lot from it.
It opens a little door for him.
Is he a writer or an actor?
He wants to be a fiction writer.
He is a fiction writer.
But this book was a chance to get in print, get his name out there, make connections.
Very young, very young age to have a published book out there too.
And he has guts.
I mean, he's trying to make it, as a writer, in a way that I never had.
I've always had a day job.
Because I grew up having nothing, and so you have those fears.
Once you have those fears of having nothing, you never quite, at least I never quite, got past the point of wanting something secure.
And now you have a wonderful position that you miss.
Your writing is acknowledged the world over for its excellence, and it's great literary merit.
And you continue to teach.
It's still kind of harking back to the, you want this...
Security of a regular job.
It's also pretty practical.
Get your ass back here.
I'm not finished.
Anyway, they're talking about the day job.
Yeah.
For all the claims and all the books out there, I would have...
Even up until probably the last maybe 10 years, it would have been impractical to have a family.
a decent standard of living and try to do that all on the basis of the writing.
So the teaching has been necessary as much as anything else.
I like to teach.
It's a nice compliment.
The writing is total, often by myself and I enjoy being with the students and it's pretty hard to get on their cases and push high standards and
And then unless you're a total hypocrite, it comes back to me.
When I'm writing, I hear my own voice.
I hear that hectoring voice.
Writing should be this.
Writing should be that.
Don't take shortcuts.
Write about things that have meaning.
I hear all that.
I'm talking to myself.
And I'm pushing standards for them.
So what's nice here?
Undergraduates?
Graduates.
I prefer that.
I mean, a good group of undergrads is fun in a separate way.
You know, it's fun because you see the process unraveling.
You see...
and every now and again they're more daring because they don't have as much at stake so they'll write a story backwards or upside down and take chances in fact one of the things I have to do with graduate students sometimes or often is to remind them that there is something besides a well made Raymond Carver story there is something besides what they see in the little magazines and
that comes as a surprise to somebody.
Of course, you don't mind my jumping around, I hope.
It all makes sense when I... In my writing, you're going to ask me, is it okay for you to jump around?
Sure.
I make sense of it.
So do I, but jumping around is a problem.
It's approximate, but it's also kind of a height.
It's like, you know, you hear that and you think, well, has he been... was I just blocked or hiding or...
There have been two books in the last three, well actually three books if you count.
New short stories and a book of essays about my father and myself, and then cattle killing, and those all have been, I've been working on those in the last, say, four or five years.
Do you go from one form to the other?
I mean, do you say seamlessly or do you embark in a novel or a line of stories or essays?
Usually a bunch of things going at once.
The lines of demarcation aren't all that clear to me.
Sooner or later, an idea crystallizes, and I know it's going to be a novel, or it's going to be a short story, or it's going to be an essay.
But very recently, I was working on a piece about Emmett Till and shared it with a good friend of mine, Michael Felwell, who's been my editor in some ways.
Somebody I give a manuscript to very early in his opinion I trust.
And we're talking about it.
No, no.
He's a friend who teaches at UMass.
And he's called his name?
B-H-E-L-W-E-L-L.
And he's Jamaican.
He's been in this country since the Civil Rights Movement in the 60s.
He's a novelist and an essayist.
But a man of real good judgment and taste, and I can sort of trust him at an early stage of a manuscript to share it and not intrude on it, not mash it.
So anyway, we're talking, and after we talked for a while, he said, you know, sometimes...
He said, sometimes you're referring to this thing as a story and other times you talk about it as an essay.
So you better make up your mind.
And I kind of resented that at first because I wanted it to be somewhere in between.
But then I realized that, okay, I could write something that's in between, but I better know real clearly in my own head, one way or another.
So that was very helpful to me.
I went back and now it's an essay that...
It has a fictional technique in it, and it pushes like a story, but I'm clear about what it is now.
You wrote the piece about tennis play.
Did you play a lot of basketball in Europe?
That was my passion.
I played a lot of basketball until two years ago.
Well, now I run because I have a degenerative vertebrae and they squeeze on the nerves and I'm not supposed to play anymore.
I'm not supposed to run anymore, really, but I still do.
I played in college and played semi-pro ball, so it's been...
As much as writing something, it's just a passion.
Now you mentioned the passion coming up as a kid.
Did you want to be a basketball player?
Absolutely.
That was my main reason for getting good grades and going to college.
I wanted to play college football.
I wanted to play college basketball.
Probably wanted to play football before basketball.
But I never got through a football season.
No, I was a quarterback.
Really?
defensive halfback and a halfback.
This will date me, but our team in high school played single wings.
halfback really was a castle.
Might I ask all of you are?
Fifty thorn.
It's no secret.
I'm just hearing that we're in the same generation.
I earned every one.
No regrets.
So your first book was published in 1967.
Were you still on scrolling when your first book was published?
No.
I just finished the Iowa Writers' Workshop.
I mean, I was in the Writers' Workshop when the book was... I was in... By telling me that, by the way, I sell this piece to Des Moines.
Pardon me for being entrepreneurial.
Iowa City, yes, I'm an Iowa City product.
Go Hawkeyes.
One of my favorite places.
Well...
Thank you.
You know, there is kind of an Iowa Writings.
Did you say there's an Iowa Writings workshop agenda at all?
Not agenda, per se, but kind of writing name.
The biggest danger of workshops is that the instructors will lobby for some kind of template.
a way to write a story and students will get confused or the writers themselves who are teaching are confused and they get
And the confusion is that all stories have to be written on certain things.
Sir, this mustard has honey in it.
We only have a grape coupon or a bourbon.
Which is the honey?
I don't know.
I don't need mustard.
Why don't you try that?
And when I come back to the start, I'll bring you a grape coupon.
Okay.
That's really good, though.
Thank you.
She is brisk and brisk.
Excuse me, that's all.
It's not going to be broadcast.
Or maybe it will be.
I'd like that.
I wouldn't.
I've never had a complaint.
Close to a thousand other interviews.
So where were we?
We were just jumping around in the biography.
I guess I'm looking for the experience that went into the... This book comes close to 30 years after your first book was published, right?
Yeah, yeah, it's almost 30 years.
Is there 30 years of professional experience that has gone into this in terms of life, living experience?
Well...
Very much so.
The first time I came across the plague in Philadelphia was in the late 60s.
I know that because it was part of my effort to educate myself about African-American literature.
studying stuff in the Philadelphia Free Library and in the Chambord Collection in order to put together an anthology of African American riffs.
And Norton
As a coincidence, yesterday I received from Norton a copy of their big, fat, new anthology on Afro-American Lit.
But then they weren't sure whether they wanted to do a separate book or wanted me to be a talent scout and integrate the older anthology that everybody who's ever taken an American Lit course probably has used in college.
And I found out...
As I thought about taking that job and did eventually take it, I realized how little I knew about African-American youth.
And so I embarked on a self-study, self-teaching program, which turned out to be a second education.
And that began in the 60s.
and the book never materialized, got lost in the politics of separate or equal.
You know, should we do a volume and integrate some black writers or should we do separate and they never could decide.
So it didn't work at that time.
Now, 30 years later, one has come out.
But I read Bishop Allen's narrative in the library in a kind of facsimile version.
exciting to me because it told the whole story of the plague and William Carey's letter blaming black people for the plague and et cetera, et cetera.
And I knew there were many, many stories there and I tried to write it at that time.
And I did write it, but it wasn't a very good story.
And then tried it again 20 years later in fever and was satisfied with it as a story, but knew there was still more.
And so this is another
you'll never be finished never be finished because to me there are certain events that have a kind of resonance that it's impossible to wring all the meaning out of and the more i think about them the more i learn about them
It makes sense.
And I have to do a second or third or fourth take on that.
And I think about composers or painters who've done views of Delft, you know, 17 of them.
So if something is interesting to me,
It keeps energizing me, and I keep feeling I'm learning different things by considering.
Ideally, yes.
I mean, I don't do that.
I think that's a good experience.
But on the other hand, I know I have abiding concerns.
I know there are questions I ask myself again and again.
I know I return to certain material.
I know there are certain jobs I want to keep refining.
The ability to capture the eloquence and the power of the oral narrative.
The stories I heard as a kid in my family.
And to keep those stories alive, I'll never lose that urge, I don't think.
And there'll always be more to do.
in a book I'm writing now, and I think it's, I understand more about how to do it.
It'll be better, I think.
So those kinds of tasks will hold the work together, I think.
Is this the central metaphor in your life as a writer?
Is this the central metaphor?
The central metaphor is that, for me anyway, is that writing is a process.
And the process is what counts.
There's a kind of art.
a career.
And in the art, while that art is working its way out, there is good style out.
It's almost accidental when and
And I do the best I can with each one.
But the joy for me is the process continuing.
Absolutely.
When a book's over, it really is over.
I always try to have something in the works before one finishes.
Because when one finishes, it's kind of...
It's depressing, you know, postpartum blues and all that.
And Hemingway made the advice, you know, never finish without having another one in the works.
And we know what happened to him.
He tried to avoid the postpartum blues and blew his head off because he couldn't.
Or he realized that he couldn't.
It's just arguable, too, isn't it?
And nobody knows what he was thinking that last minute of those last years.
Do you read Hemingway?
Do you like Hemingway?
I have read Hemingway.
I never read Hemingway systematically.
I came across books that I liked.
At Oxford, I read two or three books of his.
The Spanish books, because I was doing a lot of traveling with Spain.
So that was kind of fun.
And I still saw myself as re-tracing.
lived down and out in Paris in Rome and, you know, brought back these stories about the old country.
I still saw myself as part of that.
I still do in a way that I've learned a little bit more.
My goals are a little more individual.
I know my history is different than theirs was.
I know
The sort of romance with Europe they had is one that, after a certain point, had less appeal for me.
In other words, I learned from their example.
Of all things, 18th century literature.
You really are a perfect person to engage in this whole discussion.
You know, the concept of the red-white European male, the relevance of the Western canon and curricula today.
Certainly you're aware to this whole, I can't believe this debate, I've just entered it myself in the last year.
You know, you're aware of things that are going on before you enter it.
It's very mixed.
Famous amount of anger and vehemence and intransigence on it.
And I will quote you, by the way, fully and accurately in this new book, which is under contract to Henry Holt, by the way.
Well, I'm on the record about these kinds of things.
The debate in some ways is...
It's important, but to me it's also boring, because it's somewhat like arguing about
Whether we should be called African-American or black or Negro, it doesn't get down to the issues.
It seldom gets down to it.
If the debate would get down to the issues, it's interesting.
But I think it seldom does.
There's a lot of grandstanding, a lot of kind of one-way conversations about what people believe.
What are the fundamental issues then that are being ignored?
That our literature is interested.
That there are no disinterested books.
Interested.
Yes, somebody has an interest in what they're doing.
and critics have an interest in what they're saying.
There never has been and never will be any way to define once and for all that this is good and that's bad and this is in the middle, top ten.
There'll never be any way to do that.
I'm an English teacher.
I had a small college day after the 60s.
I don't think I ever once heard the word, the Western canon.
No, but that's not to say it wasn't there.
It was there.
Yeah, and nobody was talking about it.
The assumptions were all implicit.
That's correct.
And now people are examining the assumptions and making them explicit.
I mean, that's fine.
But nobody's going to...
If the object of that is to come up with a new set of absolutes, then it's crazy.
You know, crazy.
You know, but what does concern a lot of people is a question of relevance.
It makes me irrelevant to society.
Scott Churro just told me that it was two weeks ago.
I didn't interview with him.
He said he was at a dinner with the president of Amherst College.
I guess Scott is an economist at Amherst.
Where the president was informed that they had just graduated summa.
Summa in English.
You know, like Gary said, we did that.
Well, the way, you know.
You know, I think it would require people to do anything, but there is a poor knowledge I would call it.
I mean, call your degree in literature and call it anything you want, but you don't want to call it English literature.
Well, can you possibly avoid studying the Shakespeare, Chester, and Dalton Spencer?
I don't know.
Well, my sense is that you can make a very good case for that position.
The one you just... I think you can make a real good case, and I probably would make it.
Um...
The only thing some people are asking is for the case to be made, not just assume that because that's the list that we receive, that it's a list that is somehow sanctioned or somehow almost divine or deterministic.
The energy and the time and the thought that's going into examining the assumptions and examining why these things are worth well, I think that is oftentimes well spent.
Well spent.
Because there is a, like any tradition, I think it's traditions that are not simply enforced from above.
Traditions really are not static, even in the most conservative societies.
You know, there's room for the individual to add a little twist to a traditional dance, where somebody sticks a feather in their hat where there wasn't a feather before.
You know, even very rigid society, so tradition changes.
And I think that's a healthy activity.
And I think you can make an argument for, let's say, an undergraduate degree.
You can make an argument for linguistics.
You can make an argument for comparative literature.
You can make an argument for anthropology as fundamental to the teaching of literature.
and maybe just as fundamental as studying individual writers.
So what you want to do by the time the students finish is give them the overview and the knowledge that would allow them to pick up any text and have some ideas of how to approach it, what to do with it, how to teach it, what they needed to understand.
You know, you don't teach language by going through every possible conversation.
You get some sort of systematic approach and get that in somebody's head, and then it's their responsibility to go out and talk and engage people and learn different vernaculars and all that.
You can use the same model for studied literature.
So to throw up your hands just because somebody doesn't have Shakespeare,
a tenable position.
I mean, you have to know what else the student learned and why.
What's the rationale?
What can that student do?
And would you rather have that student teach Shakespeare in two years than somebody who's read Shakespeare as an undergraduate, maybe in a survey course, maybe taught very superficially, you know,
I would actually love to find out who this student is.
I don't know.
I mean, to me, the most rewarding course I remember when I graduated was in Shakespeare in Shakespeare.
I mean, you quoted, you quoted, you quoted, and you, except there's that language in basketball in your New Yorker piece, which I thought was a wonderfully relevant use of a, you know, a 350-year-old play or whatever.
And a decidedly contemporary context there with Dennis Rodman.
Amazing.
You can talk about the relevance of Shakespeare.
Maybe it would even get old Dennis to read it.
That would really be an accomplished piece.
Well, the funny thing is, Shakespeare read Rodman, but it would be really unusual if he had Rodman read Shakespeare.
That's a whole high school, isn't it?
So this is, to just totally jump right under being a piece...
This novel, I'm sorry, rather than this novel, has been in progress for 30 years, 20 years?
Yeah, you know, somebody asked you, well, how long you've been working on the novel?
One answer is, well, since I was old enough to sit in my mother's lap and be rocked by her and hear her sing, I started to learn the rhythms that I wanted to get this novel.
About four years.
I had my mind on a particular idea and knew that I was working on a novel.
What do you mean by that?
Well, what I meant by that is it's going to be a different kind of novel.
than most people are used to, most readers.
And so in the first section, I try to create or line out kind of a contract with the reader.
A warning label, if you will.
A contract.
These are the things I'm going to do, and these are the sort of things you have to do.
And if I'm doing my stuff well, and you're willing to do your part, you know, a book will evolve out of this, right?
Don't expect it to be A. Don't expect it to be B. Read it for what it is.
Go slowly.
Figure it out.
I'm trying to put instructions on how to read the novel early on.
Instructions, implicit instructions in the narrative.
Those instructions are in all writing anyway.
It's a feature of all writing.
I mean, if you have a novel that says once upon a time,
Already there are certain things clicking in.
You know a certain relationship between the reader and the writer in the story.
If you say it was a crisp day in November and John entered his Volvo and turned the key, already there are assumptions about reality, assumptions about the reader's relationship to the material, assumptions about...
Here, reader, what you're going to do is have somebody talk to you, and they're going to pretend there's something like a camera, and you're going to both, or maybe even better, video camera, and you're going to hear what the camera records, and your perspective on this stuff is sort of like you're looking at it on a TV screen.
It's not there, those words, those instructions aren't there explicitly, but you sort of know all that.
when you hear, it was a crisp day in November and why I've been climbing into his car, you know, that's what's operated, those rules, those techniques.
And the reader buys into it.
If it begins as a stream of consciousness, oh shit, goddamn car won't start, oh fuck, where's my old lady, here comes a stream of consciousness, vernacular voice, the reader is being told, hey, there is no middle distance.
I do those and a couple more, many more.
I tell a reader that you can't depend on a grammatical person, like first or third to orient, to be...
stable, but you can't depend on time.
You can't depend, you can't look for a lot of cues about what's spoken and what's thought.
You can't look for conventional cues.
You can't look for conventional punctuation cues.
You have to experience this and learn the footholds and the handholds exist in a slightly different way.
Well, you know, I write about complicated things.
So I thought of trying to go on with those complicated things.
And part of the fun for me is to find for each book.
or each story, a special way to tell it.
A way that's partly dependent on tradition, what's come before, but a way that is spontaneous, it's improvised.
Because that's what turns me on.
That way it's like sport.
No matter how many points you scored yesterday in the half-court game, today, not one counts.
You know, you've got to get...
And that kind of situation is attractive to me.
I like that.
You use the comparison with sports as an athlete, of course.
I know what I'm having fun.
I know when
I'm being spoken to when my unconscious and my instincts are at work and there's a kind of effortlessness while it's happening.
But I've been writing long enough to know tomorrow I'm going to have to look at this shit real closely because maybe it was too easy.
But there are grace times when the characters speak for themselves.
I know the book so well that there's an illusion that it's almost writing itself.
Do you rewrite a life?
And that's a joy.
That's fun.
It's a joy.
Every morning, the way I start, or most mornings, is by reading a certain amount of what was done before, either immediately before or a while before, to pick up the rhythms, to remember, to revise.
And that's how I get started.
Right.
Even when it's finished.
You write on a new processor?
You write longhand.
And that process also permits or requires a lot of revision because I'll write longhand in a book, in like a hardback empty book.
And then I have to take that and write it out on a longhand legal pad before anybody else can read it.
That's about the fifth or sixth.
I love it.
When I was a kid, I was either writing or painting.
And I went to art school a little bit.
Me and Hitler.
Both went to art school.
Great fraternity, huh?
So, you know, longhand allows me, really, to draw the letters.
It gives me a visual sense of what's going on in the piece.
So I still art letters, and this nerve problem started bothering my hand.
have lots of fun like one day would be big letters another day they might be very small letters and they might be slanted you know just it's like painting with the words for a long time my wife would type up the first draft and that's when it starts to become real for me
become more objective.
Now I can actually see it and begin to make another set of revisions.
But now I have a lady who types it into a computer, she punches it out, and I don't read it.
You don't read it on screen.
Would that change it for you, do you think so?
I'm sure it would.
The process I use is kind of slow, but it's quite painstaking.
Again, it's like, to use a metaphor, it's like eating.
I have no desire to take a pill and have nourishment.
Because I like to eat.
You know, the grease, the getting, the chewing, the heartburn, whatever.
I love to do that.
That's what I, you know, that's what eating is about.
It's not just nourishment.
So, I have no real need to speed up the process.
as I got older, and it may happen.
When you get that sense of not having time, then I might want to be able to make this, speed up this process.
You might figure I have more to say and not enough time to say it.
But I'm not sure that's going to happen.
You mentioned the art of your career earlier.
So you're content with it and you actually see it.
Like that was your one?
Yeah, yeah.
With a beginning, a middle, and...
I hope so.
But you always fail, right?
One always fails.
That's what Giacometti says anyway, I believe.
Anything Giacometti says...
It made sense to me that you always fail.
You know, the piece of sculpture, the individual novel, you wanted it to be so much.
You had so many ideas for it.
I don't know if he ever felt that was a perfect fit between what he pulled out, what he found, or what he knew was in there and what he actually got out.
No, the feeling is, my feeling is, both I want to get the work at hand as perfect as I can, but the next work is a chance to always improve on the thing before.
That's where the arc comes in.
And maybe it's an ever ascending arc.
Like a rainbow come back down, yes.
I mean, I'd like to go out climbing as opposed to sinking in the west.
Jim Brown and Ted Williams are the other heroes.
There's no downward spiral, but I don't know.
Let's check in with him.
Let's do talk about the killer killing here.
I think you touched on that earlier, but you're choosing that as an event to appropriate, not only in the novel, but as the title.
You gentlemen, I'm eating?
Yes.
Yes, would you say we'd go for dessert and coffee?
I'd like some coffee.
Can I have a decaf, please?
That's a dessert.
I wanted to write a history novel.
A history novel, to me, is useful probably if and only if it's also a novel that...
embraces the present moment.
I didn't want to write a history novel just for an antiquarian motive.
It had to be something that was very much attuned or helped me tune in the present.
And I also wanted to write a history novel
And by that I mean... Thank you.
By that I mean...
In the same way that certain science fiction novels get bogged down with the machinery.
How do people get around?
What kind of crap are they wearing?
What's the name of the vehicle they're in?
How do you get air on an airless planet?
Going off into all that stuff.
I didn't want a history novel that had to depend on that kind of artifice, devices, gadgets.
I know all that stuff.
And that was part of the fun, from studying 18th century lit, from doing research for the book.
I know an awful lot about the 18th century, about all kinds of out-of-the-way things.
Like, I drew costumes.
for a whole week I drew different kinds of costume things that people were wearing and looked up books that had 18th century costumes and shoes and learned about who had who wore what kind of material which levels of society had access to which kinds of material I had a book about a farm on 18th century farm work and it's funny because a lot of times go to the library and you can get a
technical studies on some subjects.
But it turns out kids' books are the best.
These kind of modern kids' books that really give you the anatomy of an 18th century farm, the way you have to read forever in special sources.
There's a picture on a couple of pages about how you get the...
how you milk the cow, where the cow is, what the people are wearing, you know, one picture worth of many thousands of words.
So I used kids' books a lot in the library in Naples, Maine, sure, for the everyday life.
Naples, Maine?
Well, the library was in Naples, Maine, and Maine, of course, has a long colonial history, so they had a lot of books about living in Maine in the 18th century.
But then I did other kinds of research as well, reading in the literature when I was at Oxford.
used very little of it.
Or, no, I'll put it that way.
I used it all, but I only put small amounts of it on the page.
And there's a description, for instance, of a woman undressing, and as she undressed, I named the kinds of things she was wearing.
It turned out that I didn't talk a lot about farm techniques, and I didn't talk a lot about the kinds of food that were in the house.
But I did talk about baths.
You know, I had to find out a lot about that.
So the point is that I have to know all that stuff.
And it's fun for me to get to know it.
But then I don't want to, I didn't want the book to depend on that kind of illusion.
There are so many things the reader does not know about your narrator or your reader.
Do you know it?
We don't know anything about these people?
No.
Well, in a sense that they were living, breathing individuals, yes.
And I selected to tell you about certain things that happened to them and leave other things out.
But the other things you do know.
Yeah, I know.
Yes.
Clear to you.
Well...
I wouldn't say that I could write them down, but they're clear to me the way things are clear to me about my brother or my sister or my best friend.
I don't need to be there daily to have a very strong impression and to be pretty good at predicting how they would react in certain situations.
i can be away from my brothers for long periods of time and still know david's going to react sort of one way and otis react another way and robbie a third way so i know them in that sense as sort of family not somebody i'm with all the time yeah the characters i mean my brothers are family yes
Well, frankly, an essay that starts for a
critique or even an interview, beware, that starts Weidman's latest examination of the African American experience, blank, blank, you know, dot, dot, dot.
It really, first of all, disappoints me.
And it makes me feel, it disappoints me because somebody hasn't been paying attention.
And I quite agree.
It starts that way, but I think at some point it goes into the equation.
At the beginning and certainly at the end of it.
Or maybe you disagree with that.
That's it.
It definitely enters the equation, but not in a reductive sense.
Yeah, but you'd be surprised how many pieces do lead with that.
It's already categorizing the books.
or the stories and saying that they belong.
If you're interested in African-American lit, you might be interested in this book for whatever reason.
That's implicit.
Again, there's an instruction and a criticism.
Yeah, well, I mean, if you read your own entry in the statue of Companion, the 20th century American literature, brand new.
The first line is African-American writer.
Yeah.
You are, right?
So, so, so, so, so,
But here's the problem as I see it, and it's a problem in the culture.
We have a terrible, maybe fatal confusion in the public mind and even in a sort of sophisticated literary mind between race and culture.
I certainly am the product of African-descended culture.
I mean, I'm of African descent and the culture is of African descent and has a particular history.
And it's quite comparable to French culture or German culture or Italian culture or whatever.
Greek culture.
I don't know about Greeks.
We'll put that one over.
We'll talk about that later.
And that's true.
That's a fact.
The problem is...
that we confuse color and race with culture.
So that if somebody, if we see a person of color, if we see a person of color or we hear about somebody's race, we think we know something about them.
We think we can predict certain things about them.
We think that race and color are deterministic biologically.
And that's where we get into infinite trouble.
and it's not so much that it's ignorance I think it's a world of ignorance because a lot of people have always profited from the division into black and white and the further division into superior and inferior and the further division into oppressor and oppressed I mean those all follow from a certain deterministic attitude about race
And when those things come into play, of course, it makes my blood boil.
And often when somebody tries to talk about what's distinctive about my writing, they slip sort of very quietly or maybe even unconsciously from the culture side, something that's interesting and worth studying and worth talking about and accurate, to the race side.
And then it's...
than a pseudoscience and prejudice and perpetuating a kind of racist mentality, an apartheid mentality.
So it's a very crucial set of issues and problems as far as I'm concerned.
And I think they all go back to this...
Confusion, in quotes, between race and culture.